NRA political Power
Justin Napolitano


I want to first state the central premise that money equates to influence is I think an error.  Rather, it is my position that it is rather that reputation equates to political influence.  Money is a tool which may be used to further one’s or one groups reputation, but it is not in of itself a means to power.   I state this distinction to establish a deliberate rift.  My intention is to argue that it is social perception rather than money that is the most important asset to organizations, especially that of the National Rifle Association. 

To address my first point, that money is only one tool in a much larger arsenal, I cite the initial fact that as far as interest groups go the NRA does not invest very much into campaign contributions nor to Lobbying.  OpenSecrests.org ranks the NRA as the 565th most contributive interest group, donating only $360,668 directly to campaigns; and as the 82nd most active lobbying group in terms of money spent.  In context, the top 5 organizations according to the same source are Farh LLC, Uline Inc, the Carpenters and Joiners Union, the American Action Network, and Paloma Partners.  For the sake of full disclosure, organizations I have never heard of, nor am I sure most people have.  

This leads me then to ask why is it that the Carnegie Institute for World Peace, voicing their opinion through their proxy David Morton, and various sources in the media deem the NRA as the most powerful interest group in the United States (Morton, 2006)?  The simple answer is that it is cognitively expedient to do so.  The more complicated answer is that the perceived impact of the NRA is much greater than its actual power to influence politics.  

For the sake of this essay I am adapting Dahl’s simplistic definition of power.  That power is the ability of A to make B do what B would otherwise not do (Dahl, 1957). With this in mind lets analyze the power of the NRA to influence political outcomes.  

The Kenny, McBurnett, and Bordua article (2004) emphasizes rather poignantly that the effect of NRA endorsement on Congressional Elections in 1994 and 1996 are almost entirely negligible.  In 1994, there was a statistically significant measured amount of NRA power in the model to account for election results, but in 1996 no such power could be discovered.  Instead, it was found that the usual markers of the efficacy were more important such as, campaign funding, party affiliation, challenger status, and party strength. Therefore, the power of the NRA to actually influence elections seems rather unfounded, at least in the 1990’s.  

However, what about the ability of the NRA to shift the script, or in other words to shift policy positions of major political players towards a gun rights friendly direction?  To return to my previous statement, reputation, rather than money, or even electoral influence is a most powerful tool to influence political outcomes.  I adopt the position that the NRA successfully mobilizes political parties in the United States to adopt gun rights polices by way of ideological warfare.  I explain this in a post-modern perspective.  

By voicing a gun rights agenda loudly and by building a network of sympathizers beyond just the official members of the Organization the NRA by way of the process of socialization instills its own values into the network, and creates by way of reaction an antithesis in that network which opposes the thesis.  To bypass falling into the abyss of a Foucault-esque by way of Hegelian explanation of the phenomena, I assert here that the NRA simply loudly endorses certain ideas and loudly opposes others.  Individuals then within the network adopt the ideology and further reinforce dogma by either rewarding or punishing other individuals they come into contact with.  This can be as simple as excluding those without pro-gun values from the in-crowd at the local watering spot.  The result of which is socializing into networks sympathetic with the values of the NRA a pro-gun rights ideology that political leaders seeking office must accurately represent in order to win votes.  

The perception of this phenomena by social groups in opposition to NRA values is what leads to the overvaluation of the power of the NRA as an organization.  Rather, the “power” of the NRA is a social power that ebbs and flows within the NRA system.  When that system is effectively mobilized power is focused into a single issue.  Hence, when the proverbial house is on fire, when the congress is attempting to pass new gun control measures, the network lashes out against an action perceived to be threatening to the social identity of the group.  However, when the issue is largely non-challenging to the group identity the network does not mobilize.  
Therefore, when the NRA system is mobilized against a single measure, the entire network of people in support of that measure perceive the NRA as responsible.  This fallacy is equally apparent in all social organizations.  It is the CEO that is responsible for the company, the President that is responsible for the country….ad absurdum.  In reality, however it is the entire social group that is truly the beast which is furthering some arbitrary set of values.  The power of the NRA therefore is not dependent upon an ability to spend outrageous amounts of money, but instead the result of social reinforcement within the NRA system.

To further iterate my point, I use an example from the film Inception.  For those that have seen the film, remember that it only takes a single idea placed at the deepest level of consciousness to invoke strong emotional responses and to influence action.  Ideological groups like the NRA use this truth to invoke strong psychological triggers.  By comparing all governments with gun control measures to Hitler’s administration, or to the registration of firearms to the social policies of the Holocaust those within the NRA network immediately become distrustful of any social control mechanism related to gun control.  This reverberates without bounds until it is challenged by an equally powerful emotional appeal.  Logical reasoning fails us when we fear or distrust.  To quote Jung, “We should not pretend to understand the world only by intellect.  The Judgement of the intellect is only part of the truth.” 

Finally, in conclusion, in terms of the power of the NRA, it is the perceived threat of the NRA to opposition social systems that accounts for the accepted idea that the NRA is the most powerful interest group in the United States.  As it is the most vocal, and seemingly the most discussed, the National Rifle Association is to its members, the vanguard against the fascist- corporatists, and somehow also the socialists; to its sympathizers, a protector of individual freedom; and to its enemies, the most powerful interest group in the United States.  In objective reality, it is merely an organization with moderate resources that runs ads with catchy slogans.  The power of the NRA to make others do its will is moderate, however, the power of the NRA system to make others do what they otherwise would not do may be extensive.   To answer the specific question posed, money is not a major factor contribute to the power of the NRA, but rather the perceived social value of the organization accounts for its power.  


References

Dahl, Robert A. "The concept of power." Systems Research and Behavioral Science 2, no. 3 (1957): 201-215.

Kenny, Christopher, Michael McBurnett, and David Bordua. "The impact of political interests in the 1994 and 1996 congressional elections: The role of the National Rifle Association." British Journal of Political Science 34, no. 2 (2004): 331-344.

Morton, David. "Gunning for the World." Foreign policy 152 (2006): 58.

National Rifle Association. Opensecrets.org/orgs/summary.php?id=d000000082id=d000000082




